In this chapter, I aim to summarize the application domain of this research project. An introduction into multi-carrier energy systems is followed by a description of current GO schemes and system components. Thereafter, I explain relevant DLT components as well as current proposals in the application domain for cross-carrier interoperability of GO schemes.

# Current GO systems and components

Over the past decades, there has been increasing societal and regulatory importance attached to the tracking of sustainability attributes of products and materials. Following this growing demand, public and private standards and certification schemes have been implemented (Mol und Oosterveer 2015). In Energy markets, sustainability tracking occurs through a Guarantee of Origin system which traces the attributes of renewable energy from production to consumption.

## Basic Components

**Legal framework**
In the electricity market, GOs are a well-established instrument for the tracing of renewable energy attributes(Mould et al. 2022), (Hamburger 2019). The closest thing to a global standard is provided by the I-REC foundation which accredits and audits national GO scheme protocols for both electricity and hydrogen based on the I-REC standard, however, it is not used in the EU or the US. In the EU, guarantees of origin were introduced as part of the first renewable energy directive (RED I) (European Commission). The RED II directive (European Commission 2018) made the issuance of GOs mandatory upon request of the producer (§2) and extended the scope of GO scheme application with mandatory issuance onto the energy carriers of hydrogen, biogas/biomethane and heating and cooling (§7). Furthermore, the directive mandated compliance of GO schemes with the reference architecture and design principles set out in the CEN16325 standard (§6). The CEN16325 standard was revised to include principles specific to the newly included energy carriers (AIB 2021a).
Chain of custody
By and large, energy carrier GO schemes employ a book-and-claim chain of custody model (AIB 2021a). Book-and-claim is a chain of custody model for sustainability tracing in supply chains (Mol und Oosterveer 2015). It fully decouples the physical flow of products in the supply chain from the trade of certificates (Sedlmeir et al. 2021). No segregation or monitoring of physical products is necessary, reducing complexity and cost. Given the physical properties of the energy carriers, especially electricity, the tracking of specific units of output through the grid infrastructure is “hardly practical or even impossible” (Sedlmeir et al. 2021). Gas and hydrogen GO schemes can employ a mass-balance model (Velazquez Abad und Dodds 2020), as is the case, for example, in Germany and Switzerland. An overview on different chain of custody models can be found in (Mol und Oosterveer 2015) and is visualized in Figure 1.

**Stakeholders**

Stakeholders of GO schemes belong to three groups: issuing bodies, producers and consumers. Issuing bodies are appointed by the regulator and given responsibility for the registration of account holders, audit of production devices, the issuing, transfer and cancellation of GOs, as well as the operation of a registration database (AIB 2021a). Issuing bodies might appoint agents to perform one or several of these functions on their behalf. Producers generate energy from RES and market the renewable attributes through the GO scheme. Consumers are usually local distributors such as local electric utility companies, procuring GOs for energy disclosure to the end customer, but can also include corporate consumers, procuring GOs for Scope 2 corporate sustainability disclosure (Brindley et al. 2021). Disclosure is mandatory for local distributors in all energy carrier markets (European Commission 2018), however, implementation of this in alternative energy carrier is an ongoing process (AIB 2021a).
Processes
The main business processes of a GO scheme ensure the verification of the underlying data, the secure transfer of ownership and the correct use for disclosure (AIB 2021a). Producers can participate in the scheme after having provided detailed information on the production devices and, in some cases, after an audit of the devices by the Issuing body. Issuing, transfer and cancellation requests are processed in the GO registry, centrally administrated by the Issuing body. GO Issuing occurs periodically (usually every month) for measured energy outputs. GOs are then deposited into the accounts of registered account holders who may transfer them to other account holders. While transfer of ownership occurs through the registry, GOs are traded on separate trading platforms, such as EPEX SPOT (European Energy Exchange (EEX) 2021). Cancellation of a GO entitles the customer to claim the renewable attributes represented by the GO for their disclosure.
Cross-border interoperability
In the EU, harmonization of schemes is provided on a legal level through the RED II directive and on the semantic and technical level through the CEN16325 standard and the AIB-Hub which serves as a central registry for cross-domain transfer of AIB-accredited national GO schemes, mainly for electricity, but increasingly also for biogas (Association of Issuing Bodies 2021). While cross-border interoperability for electricity GO schemes is well-established, cross-border interoperability of alternative energy carriers is lacking behind, largely because many EU countries have not even established GO schemes for these energy carriers. CertifHy develops a supra-national Hydrogen GO standard (CertifHy 2022a), however, Hydrogen GO pilot schemes have so far been implemented only in one European country – the Netherlands (HyXchange 2022). For biomethane, ten European countries have established registries and eight countries have appoints Issuing Bodies, as of 2020 (Renewable Gas Trade Centre in Europe (REGATRACE) 2020). The CertifHy registry, like the AIB-Hub, employs a centralized IT-solution for cross-border transfer of GOs.

## Energy carrier conversion:

**Energy carrier conversion rules**

The CEN16325 standard defines energy carrier conversion as “the production of an Energy Carrier from one or more Inputs including at least one other Energy Carrier” (van Stein-Callenfels et al. 2021). Similar to the production from primary energy, in the case of energy carrier conversion, the energy input and output of a production device has to be measured. Renewable energy attributes of input energy that is not primary energy produced on-site are proven by cancellation of GOs (van Stein-Callenfels et al. 2021). The issuing body has to verify that the quantity of cancelled GOs corresponds to the quantity of input energy fed into the production device. As a result, GOs issued for the output energy inherit the attributes of input GOs and additional information from the input GOs (e.g. ) need to be correctly transposed onto the output GO (van Stein-Callenfels et al. 2021).
Energy carrier conversion almost always comes with energy loss. If all input energy in a conversion process was covered by GOs, the number of outputs GOs will have to be proportional to the input GOs by the conversion efficiency factor of the associated process, e.g. 0.8 GOs issued for every 1 GO cancelled if conversion efficiency is 80% (Verwimp et al. 2022). A conversion process might also include on-premise or other off-grid renewable energy generation, e.g. a nearby wind turbine, in which case the output GOs need to separately register the attributes of the different input RES (Gasgrid Finland 2022). A conversion process might also have a certain amount of emissions associated with it in which case these emissions would have to be compounded onto the emission attributes of the input GOs in the output GO (Verwimp et al. 2022). An input energy carrier GO could have been subsidized and this is marked on GOs in some countries, which lowers its value. This would also need to be carried over onto the output GO (Verwimp et al. 2022). In the case of energy storage, GOs in the volume of the storage loss have to be cancelled to dispose of the renewable energy attributes corresponding to the lost energy (van Stein-Callenfels et al. 2021).
Since most countries having implemented GO schemes for energy carriers other than electricity do not operate them in one unified registry (Gasgrid Finland 2022), energy carrier conversion will require cross-carrier interoperability and cross-registry interactions. Different registry operators will have to verify the cancellation of an input GO in another registry, for example, through a trustworthy cancellation statement. More generally, registry operators need to be able to have trust in the input GO issuance (device registration, data flows, inspection and audits), the GO transfer and the security of the input energy carrier database.
Proposed IT-solutions for cross-carrier GO interoperability
(Verwimp et al. 2022) outlines three potential system architectures and corresponding IT-solutions to enable the cross-carrier transfer of information and renewable energy attributes: ex-domain cancellations, import of input energy certificates into the output carrier registry and a central cancellation database. Under the ex-domain cancellation architecture, the registries of the input carriers cancel GOs in the volume of the input energy and provide electronic cancellation statements (in a harmonized format) to the output carrier registry, which uses the cancellation statement both as proof and to correctly transpose attributes onto the output GO. Under the certificate import architecture, the output GO registry imports ‘living’ GOs from the input energy registries. This solution, while providing a higher level of automation, requires the interoperability between registries on a semantic and technical level. Under the central cancellation database architecture, input GO cancellation, attribute inheritance and output GO issuance occur in a single central database, which is integrated with the individual certificate registries, providing a high level of automation, while requiring less harmonization, albeit at higher implementation cost (Verwimp et al. 2022).

**Specifics of alternative energy carrier GO schemes**

Alternative energy carriers, i.e. hydrogen, biogas and DHC, differ (from electricity and among each other) with regards to their physical properties, delivery networks and market structures, leading to differences in GO scheme standards. GO schemes for alternative energy carriers are significantly less mature than electricity GOs and have been implemented in only a fraction of EU states. Specific rules for alternative energy carrier GO schemes are set out in the revision of CEN16325 (van Stein-Callenfels et al. 2021). A number of specific rules apply to all GO schemes of alternative energy carriers. Alternative energy carrier GO schemes have to record all input energy types as well as their share in total input according to an energy input factor (AIB 2021a).
Whereas in the electricity market energy output data is usually obtained from TSOs or DSOs (e.g. imbalance settlement data and only rarely requires data to be provided through the export meter of the registered production device (van Stein-Callenfels et al. 2021), in alternative energy carrier GO schemes, production data is usually provided directly by the producer and verified in regular audits (Sailer et al. 2021). For example, in the CertifHy scheme, audits of production data occur on an annual basis and 10% of certificates are only issued after this (CertifHy 2022b; Sailer et al. 2021).
**Biogas/hydrocarbon gas:**

Biogas GOs have to contain information on both the means of supply, that is, whether the gas was injected into a pipeline or transported by vehicle, and on the type of gas, differentiating between ‘network compatible gas’ and ‘other gas’ (van Stein-Callenfels et al. 2021). If biogas GOs are cancelled for conversion issuance, the GOs have to be of the same type of gas as the gas that is actually flowing into the production device (Verwimp et al. 2020).

**Hydrogen:**

**District heating and cooling**

GOs for DHC also need to provide information on the medium of conveyance (water, thermal-oil, refrigerant, etc.), the predominant aggregation state (solid, liquid, gaseous) as well as supply temperature and supply pressure. Furthermore, since DHC grids are localized networks, GOs have to specify the identity of the network through which the unit of output was supplied (van Stein-Callenfels et al. 2021). In addition to the rules for DHC GO schemes laid out in CEN16325, the specifics of DHC production and distribution requires further design considerations (Styles und Claas-Reuther 2023). Grid and storage losses are ignored in most European electricity GO systems (Cornélis und Lenzen 2020). Although voluntary cancellation by the grid operators to compensate for grid losses is possible in principle, it is currently practiced only in the Netherlands (Styles et al. 2021). In DHC systems, grid losses are much larger than in electricity grids: 5.4% loss in 2021 in German electricity grids to 13% average loss in local DHC grids in 2020 (Styles et al. 2021). Whereas in the electricity market, lost energy has to be procured by the TSO or DSO, DHC systems are usually vertically integrated meaning that grid loss could be taken into account in the production process more easily (Styles et al. 2021).

## Distributed Ledger Technology components

**Hyperledger Fabric**

Hyperledger is an open-source project hosted by the Linux Foundation with contributions, among others, from IBM. It is the umbrella term for a variety of distributed ledger technology projects, six of which have reached the post-incubation stage as of 2024.
